Dr SE freed it's such an honor to have
you here I know my listeners and
followers are going to learn a ton from
this episode and it's one of those
topics that I wish I could just go and
make everybody listen to because it's so
important and I followed your work for a
really long time I'm a I'm a big fan of
it um I try I know in my community to
really highlight the work that you've
done um so I would love for you to start
with just telling the listeners how you
got so interested in looking at cancer
as a metabolic disease you wrote your
book on it you have over 200
Publications on it um we really need to
get this this message this information
education out to the masses and um
there's a lot of roadblocks to that so
just tell us how you got so interested
in this topic well thank you Shannon
it's nice to be here and tell you a
little bit about the this the work that
that we're
doing in our attempt to manage cancer
but I we've been working on this uh for
40 years um I started at at Yale
University uh when I was um an assistant
professor there in neurology
neurology and most of us were working on
epilepsy and of course I've done a a
large amount of work on on on mapping EP
genes for epilepsy and um at the same
time time uh we were doing a lot of
biochemistry uh on brain uh brain
biochemistry related to not only
epilepsy but various other disorders and
including brain tumors um but it was
pure basic research uh you isolate and
purify lipids from tumor tissue uh
comparing uh Mouse brain tumors with
human brain tumors I had access to uh
human tissue from the neuros my my
colleagues that worked in
neurosurgery and I had developed a
number of of models of brain cancer and
mice that uh we were trying to figure
out what the similarities would be in
the lipid composition of mouse and human
brain tumors to see whether or not we
could develop good models and just basic
basic science stuff um and uh we didn't
start getting into metabolic management
of cancer until um uh I we noticed that
uh we had overlapping studies of
epilepsy and brain tumor
biochemistry in the lab then I when I
left Yale I came to BC Boston College
and now we're doing we've been doing
that for a long time but we noticed that
in epilepsy um calorie restricted
restriction and ketogenic diets are a
well-known way to manage epileptic
seizures and um
we were seeing such powerful effects of
calorie restriction and um restricted
ketogenic diets for managing managing
epilepsy and uh very interesting that um
we were doing work on brain cancer of
course but we weren't using any
metabolic approaches but then some
person uh uh we had some drugs that that
uh we were supported by by a company I I
we gave this in lipid inhibitor drug to
some of our brain cancer mice and we
noticed that um it really had a powerful
effect in in shrinking the brain tumors
in the mice and um oh the company got
very excited about this and uh so we did
further more studies and then we
realized that some you got to be very
careful sometimes sometimes
drugs uh change the food intake of the
animal so we didn't know at the time we
thought this drug was really exciting uh
as a brain cancer reducing drug until we
put in the appropriate control
experiments where we fed the
mice uh we maintain the body weight of
the control mice with the uh same as the
experimental mice turned out that this
drug the the M the mice kept eating food
but they were losing body
weight and um we didn't know if we were
all excited we thought the drug was
targeting targeting a specific path way
in lipid
synthesis and um then when we put in the
control group was was just restrict the
food of the mice so the body weight of
the of the control mice not getting the
drug was the same as the body weight of
the mice that got the drug and we found
out surprisingly that the tumor shrunk
to the exact same degree so it had
nothing to do with the drug which was
very disturbing to the company that had
support So I said what the hell is going
on with this this is like a eye opener
for us because we had been doing calorie
restriction in epilepsy and we knew that
calorie restriction in epilepsy was
working by lowering blood sugar and kids
that go on ketogenic diets that are
managed with their epilepsy uh
invariably have low steady blood sugar
levels and then we said well this cancer
drug is it was interesting what was
happening the mice were eating food but
they were losing weight the the problem
is the drug block the ability of the
sucres in your digestive system from
generating you couldn't the mouse were
eating food but they couldn't break it
down for energy and their blood sugar
was going down so it was the same as
what was going on with the epilepsy and
I said oh my God and then I said and it
was blocking blood vessels was doing all
these great things to shrink tumors and
then I said did anyone ever notice this
before and then I looked at OT warberg
had claimed a long time ago that the
tumors need glucose to to grow so uh um
I saidwell there's the linkage right
there and then we then did a whole bunch
of other studies proving without a
question of a doubt that the amount of
blood sugar was directly related to how
fast the tumors would grow so the lower
the sugar the fast the slower the tumor
would grow and then we started seeing
human studies case reports and things in
in Colon breast brain all these
different cancers uh after we did our
work we started to see people measuring
blood sugar and invariably it was always
associ the lower the sugar the slower
the tumor would grow and people that
would have high blood sugar with cancer
invariably had a much worse outcome so
uh people were dying um uh faster with
the high blood sugar so uh then we began
to look at the mechanisms by which um
lowering sugar could stop tumor growth
and we found based on Oto warberg study
that uh tumor cells require uh
fermentation uh through glycolysis using
sugar and that if you lower the blood
sugar you simply shut down the ability
of the tumors to generate energy and
metabolites for for their growth um and
they had been a huge controversy in the
cancer field about this
observation um a lot of Mis
misinformation misunderstanding we have
cleared up all of the major problems
associated with warberg hypothesis is on
cancer he number one he did not know
that there was a second major fuel that
we have discovered that can be used for
fermentation which is glutamine the
amino acid glutamine and it's very hard
to use diet to lower glutamine uh you
can easily lower glucose with diet but
you but it's very hard to do it for
glutamine except High heavy exercise
that will that will do it but we we we
now have
recognized that all cancer is a simple
disease dependent on fermentation
metabolism they can't grow without
glucose and glutamine and they can't use
ketones or fatty acids to replace uh
glucose or glutamine so now this
represents a very uh uh a novel
simplistic and approachable way to
manage the majority of cancers in people
um the science is Rock Solid um between
myself and warberg and several other
folks in the field uh it becomes clear
and we have interrogated these cancer
cells trying to find any fuels that
could replace glucose and glutamine and
we haven't found any so it's clear the
the killes heel for this disease is a
fermentation metabolism and if you just
deprive the whole body of these
fermentable fuels uh you will Target and
eliminate uh and manage the majority of
cancers uh without
toxicity now of course what what I just
said is just uh unacceptable to A system
that is currently in place that's the
problem yeah it's interesting because
when I was a senior in college in the
dietetics
program I was so interested in the
ketogenic diet and how it worked and it
was at I mean this was 25 years ago and
but I don't think a lot has changed like
at that time the only thing it was being
used for were for children with epilepsy
and was the base you know that was all
of the research that I was Finding and
what I did my my paper on but um yeah I
mean it's it's used for so many other
things now and the findings when you say
like cancer is a simple disease people
are probably like what cancer is so
complicated and there's so many
different types and there's all these
genetic mutations but yeah as you
alluded to the problem is we're treating
it as a genetic disease rather than a
metabolic disease and that just rather
than keeping it simple and treating it
in a in a a lot more simple manner it's
just exploded into this you know massive
money generating
um yeah well and as you said and the
problem is right now um if you go to the
National Cancer
Institute um um website NCI National
Cancer Institute um and you look at
their page and they say whatat is cancer
and they say cancer is a genetic disease
um the National Health Institute in
England in the UK United Kingdom is the
same and um you hear Precision medicine
personalized therapies this is all based
on cancer as being a genetic disease and
if cancer is not a genetic disease uh
but a mitochondrial metabolic disease
then uh you're never going to achieve
the type of progress that you would have
expected considering you're putting so
much effort into this event and even at
the at the national level when um
president um Obama uh chose to call the
moonshot project which at that time um
Joe Biden was the vice president his job
was to oversee the moonshot project and
now as president he's resurrected this
moonshot which is um a hundred million
dollar for U cancer research in
immunotherapies and immunotherapy is
based on the somatic mutation theory
that cancer is a genetic disease not to
say that the new Precision medicines
don't work they do for some people they
work really really well but for other
folks it will kill them faster than the
tumor and for a lot of folks it doesn't
it doesn't have any impact um you know
in knowledge if we know the cancer cells
can't live without glucose and glutamine
it seems it seems to me to be the most
logical way is just deprive the cell of
the glucose and glutamine and if if you
don't kill them all doing this you may
need perhaps some Precision uh tool to
go in and finish off the survivors um
but you wouldn't use that tool at the
beginning because of the um the
difference is yes all the tumor cells in
all the cells in a given tumor have a
whole different array of genetic
mutations they're not all the same in
fact almost every single cell in the
tumor is a different genetic entity but
every cell in that tumor depends on
glucose and glutamine to survive so you
can actually decimate the majority of
tumor cells with metabolic therapy and
then perhaps come in with what we call
certain parts of the standard of care to
finish off uh this and your body gets
much healthier um we published The Press
pulse concept of how we slowly degrade
tumors while enhancing the health and
vitality of the rest of the body so um
because we found that many many folks
that have cancer also have other
comorbidities like diabetes and obesity
and and high blood pressure and
hypertension and all these kinds of
things they all interfere with how
effective a therapy would be so our
press pulse concept is we slowly uh
degrade tumor while we're bringing the
whole body back into a state of health
um and this is the this will be the new
standard of care for for cancer once
people realize how it works and the
concepts behind it and then uh at the
very end if we can't completely resolve
the disease uh we can certainly uh bring
to bear parts of the standard of care
that may now have much greater power to
kill off a few few cells in a very
healthy body uh than in trying to attack
a giant aggressive tumor with a therapy
that uh could also uh harm the body at
the same time you're trying to uh and
not take care of some of the other
comorbidities so the whole strategy of
how we're going to deal with cancer will
will change it has to because right now
we in the United States we have almost
1,700 people a day dying from cancer and
breast cancer has now replaced heart
disease as the number one killer of
women over 40 years of age so clearly
we're not making any major progress in
managing cancer because the underlying
theory is incorrect it's a metabolic
disorder once you realize that you're
going to see the Dr the death rate drop
significantly so it's just a matter of
time to before this happens yeah it's
maddening that it's not the standard of
care now knowing what's been uncovered
and many of my listeners know my mom was
diagnosed with pancreatic cancer
in August just like four or five months
ago and we're living this right now and
the first thing they wanted to do
because it was non-surgical it had
spread she had therosis of the liver
also so that just exacerbates a lot of
things um but she also had like a small
tumor in in the in her back that they
wanted to radiate and I started going
with her to her appointments knowing you
know your research and other books that
I've read other cancer metabolic Cancer
Specialists that I've followed and the
first thing they wanted to do was the
genetic testing and I have two sisters
and they're like this is more for your
daughters than anyone else I'm like well
I'm not changing my lifestyle based on
whatever outcome you find so it was just
kind of crazy and then she's you know in
the thrs of chemotherapy and you know
I'm trying to get her research but it's
just it's such a fastpaced system I mean
she was in chemo with within weeks and
um we had you know we were going to do
the ketogenic diet and some fasting
strategies around her chemo theapy and I
think she did it for the first um the
first session and then the chemo just
annihilated her so much and brought her
immune system down her function down so
much that it's like she just she her
brain is shot her memories like she can
barely walk and now she's been through
five rounds and I just think oh if we
could go back and do this all over again
and I had given her year work um and um
it's just unfortunate that now like her
body is so
depleted that you know I don't even know
where the therapies should go from here
um but yeah I'd like to go back and talk
about how you and your team have found
that cancer feeds off glucose and
glutamine glutamine being an amino acid
and we know know that we can bring um
the glucose way down with diet the
ketogenic diet and glutamine like you
said that's a little trickier I mean
that's amino acid that's found in so
many foods it's and and so many other
systems use that and it it's not like
you can just you know completely deplete
the glutamine so and you talked about
your pulse therapy so is the idea of
just getting people what started with
the therapies that you found like get
getting them into nutritional ketosis
low glucose and then you you're doing
the pulse therapies for the glutamine am
I understanding that correctly yeah
you're understanding that right that so
that's what we do um we try to get the
and and people say you know where are
the clinics to do this um and and the
fact is there are there aren't very many
you can't the you're not allowed to do
this okay so let's let's uh be be clear
about that um um this has to become the
new standard of care but the problem is
it's not and they get angry when you uh
bring this to their attention um but but
you're right we to Target glutamine now
you can Target glutamine glutamine is an
is a considered a
non-essential amino acid mainly because
the body can synthesize it from sugar
from glucose you can synthesize
glutamine from from um U from glucose it
is the most abundant amino acid
in our bloodstream so if you were to go
and have an amino acid analysis of your
blood glutamine would be the number one
amino acid in in the blood glutamine is
essential for the Ura cycle glutamine is
an essential metabolite for our immune
system glutamine is an essential
metabolite for the health and function
of our gut so you need this amino acid
even though they call it a non-essential
amino acid is absolutely essential itial
for certain physiological
systems um but there is no food that you
can eat that would deprive you of
glutamine okay period you glutamine if
you don't your body's going to make it
from sugar anyway but if you uh we we
found is water only fasting with uh
exercise will lower blood glutamine
levels you can lower your blood
glutamine levels down uh to a
significant degree is it low enough to
completely deprive the tumor cell which
is an essential necess it's essential
for that that uh cell you you can't you
got to be careful with it and this is
what we're that's why we pulsing the
pulsing concept means that you just hit
it briefly for certain periods of time
to just uh kill off the tumor cells
gradually um uh deprive them so if
they're already choked on the glucose
side then you can pulse them on the
glutamine side and gradually degrade
them slower than you would normally
while maintaining the health and
vitality of your body now it is true
that some people who do long-term water
only fasting like ganab bom and I I'm
getting reports back from several folks
who told me that whatever different
kinds of cancers they have had uh
completely disappear after long-term
repeated water only fasting uh and
exercise and this kind of thing and and
that really uh powers powers the body
the body will turn on the tumor cells
and use them as food uh when you don't
eat a lot of food the body goes through
an incredible uh surveillance internal
surveillance system where every cell in
the body now has to carry its own weight
and be be uh productive for the whole
the good of the whole the whole the
whole society of cells all organ systems
in the body must be op operational at
the highest level of efficiency tumor
cells are not they're massively
inefficient uh they're they're consumers
of energy in a very unefficient way so
when the surveillance system comes when
you put your body under these restricted
conditions internally they'll go after
those tumor cells and Destroy them and
eat them and redistribute the fuel in
the in the membranes of the tumor cells
for the rest of the body so but you have
to get into that zone before that
happens
and um what we find though is when some
folks are given standards of care
whether it's chemo or radiation blood
sugar and goes up through the roof so
the body uh is making you're you're
putting when you put your body in
stress um emotional or physical stress
corticosteroids go up it's a it's a um
fright flight kind of a thing and that's
not good for cancer um so what you what
we what part of the press therapeutic
strategy is Stress Management as well
not only are we depriving the the the
fuels by uh diet and potentially small
drugs that we use to Target
glutamine um but we also reduce
emotional stress as part of the uh
overall U ability for the body to heal
itself so um so all of that plays a role
and you know right now we're the most
powerful drug uh for glutamine targeting
is 60 oxy norleucine Dawn it's been used
in the research Community for years um
it was used on cancer patients years ago
uh they said it was too toxic because
they gave too high of a dosages under
wrong conditions uh without targeting
glucose and knowing not knowing how to
use the tool they had they had a
powerful tool and they didn't know how
to use it so they took it off the market
um and they gave it to little kids and
other cancer patients and things and
some people responded really well but
now we know how to use that tool and
that drug should be absolutely a a part
of the cancer therapy cocktail of of
treatments but it's not um and if you
try to get it on on compassionate use
the bureaucracy is just uh very very
difficult you got to get State paperwork
you got to get Federal paperwork it's
like oh people can say oh we're going to
have you know compassionate use but it's
it's not easy to go through the
bureaucracy get it's crazy because
there's a drug that would have when used
in the right way uh could have massive
therapeutic benefits um the problem is
that when off patent nobody can make a
buck on it yeah and um and and so you're
left with that so we have to sacrifice
all these poor cancer patients because
there's a drug available that they can't
get um and it's just it's tragic on all
on all levels and uh there are companies
now that are trying to you know tweak
the structure of that molecule
so that they can patent it and make a
lot of money on it but it's going to be
the same drug no matter how you look at
it the bottom line it's the it's the
it's that GL it looks just like
glutamine it's a very similar structure
to the amino acid glutamine it just
blocks the ability of the enzymes to
make to use glutamine as an energy
source so you're really starving you
just block the Machinery by by which the
tumor cell can use the glutamine and
then you strangle it with no glucose and
the drug diet combo uh just really
demolishes what we we just have a paper
now um we've submitted on childhood
high-grade Goma uh this is the number
one killer of little kids high-grade
Goma uh brain cancer little kid die from
these horrible brain Cancers and they're
irradiated and poisoned uh and most of
them if even if they survive they have
brain damage from the treatments um but
we have a we developed a new model of
pediatric high-grade Goma and we use
diet drug cocktails and just just had
man just such incredible Improvement uh
in in how long the preclinical the mouse
models can live and we say this would be
a Blockbuster in pediatric Goma can't
use it can't use it uh because it's not
part of the standard of care and I'm
sure that there going to be some parents
out there who have little kids they're
destined to be dead or severely brain
damaged uh as the result of these
treatments when we have a a a strategy
already in place now all of the stuff
that we have come to know that works is
comes from our preclinical studies here
at Boston College uh I've developed the
best models for testing cancer um and we
know they work so much better in people
than they work in the mice I can tell
you that right now we have never
achieved complete resolution of cancer
in our preclinical models now all of our
preclinical models are natural to that
organism
but we're shocked when we when those are
translated into the human clinic and how
well humans humans do so much better on
these metabolic therapies than do the
mice so clearly when I say that uh uh we
see p powerful effect in our preclinical
system we know for a fact that will have
even more powerful effect as soon as you
use it in the clinic because we've seen
this over and over again so we've never
cured a mouse with a ketogenic diet or
calorie restriction but humans are
reporting to me over and over again
complete resolution in their cancer from
these long-term water only fasts we
never saw that in the mouse but we were
able to use that to show in the humans
because we were getting remarkable
Improvement but not resolution but we
see more resolution in the human it's
just it's just that kind of a connection
yeah and that's such an interesting and
important point to note and just to let
that sink in for the listeners that a
lot of times it's not so much
eradicating all the cancer I mean we all
have cancer cells but just learning how
to maybe live with the cancer that you
have and not letting it progress and not
letting it take your quality of life but
more so you know just having better
outcomes and longer longevity than you
would if you would have undergone this
the standard of care that is maddening
right now and um I know you know going
back to the glucose part of of things
too when I went to one of my mom's
appointments with her her oncologist was
a younger female so I thought maybe she
would be a little bit more Progressive
but when I brought up the fact that we
were going to do some ketogenic diets
and fasting around chemotherapy I should
have never said that because then she
was like all on guard right away and she
said I want you to know that cancer
feeding off of sugar is a myth that's
what she said to my mom like directly
that that is a myth that it's not true I
don't want you fasting around your
treatments we just need to you know keep
your weight up this is what they tell
all the cancer patients keep your weight
up and you know not lose any weight and
then they sent her home with a bag of
Ure instead and I was like just I can't
you know what we call that we call that
medical malpractice yeah it should be
medical malpractice those folks should
be uh
reprimanded uh it's just the opposite of
what you would do that's the pro the
problem is that young woman and most of
them are simply not trained they have no
they have very they have no clue about
the the the disorder they're treating
they have no understanding of the
biology they they don't read the
scientific literature they're just
indoctrinated to do this based on their
on their training so it's really it's
really one of the great I say it's the
greatest tra in the history of medicine
that you would have so many trained
professionals who have little of any
knowledge about the disorder that
they're working with um it's really
scary for the cancer patient because
they look to these folks as helpers to
facilitate and what they're essentially
doing is in so many ways killing them um
um and and why do you think we have 1700
people a day dying from cancer this is
not
insignificant right it's it's overtaking
heart disease throughout the world is
the number one killer of people and and
if you go anywhere in the world that
response that that oncologist gave to
you is standard response almost
everywhere in the world you know there's
an example you had a 350 pound person um
they were afraid he might lose body
weight if he did fasting with cancer
what the hell is going on with that I
mean it's like nuts so um and it's scary
and it's a tragedy I I call it a great
medical tragedy that um so few of the
oncologists know anything about the
biology of the disease they're treating
right right so that's scary that is
absolutely a scary situation and it
definitely and it just undermined
anything that I had taught her or you
know it's like what is your daughter the
metabolic nutrition Specialists know
about cancer you know it's like of
course you're going to want to listen to
the oncologist and the the doctors with
years of training and um so yeah it's
just so the the other thing too you have
to realize that people say well we have
millions of so-called cancer survivors
so they must know something about what
they do and the answer is that's true
and and but many many many many of those
cancer survivors pay a significant price
yeah for their viability they have many
many other uh uh comorbidities and
abnormalities as as for the fact that
they were able to survive toxic
poisoning and treatments uh with neuros
psychiatric problems digestive problem
hormonal problem bone density problems
all these other health issues that will
in the long term reduce their overall
Survival on the planet and quality of
life now metabolic therapy is designed
to not only uh degrade the tumor but
also he increase the health and vitality
uh of the rest of the body it it's a
win-win situation uh the problem is uh
very few folks understand it uh uh uh if
the National Cancer Institute is telling
people that cancer is a genetic disease
well obviously they must know what
they're talking about they've awarded
several Nobel prizes to folks that have
contributed to this mind set that cancer
is a genetic disease um we're not saying
of course there's mutations in cancer
but they all come as the result of the
Disturbed energy metabolism they're an
effect they're not the cause so the
field is chasing effects and trying to
manage the Disease by targeting effects
rather than the underlying driver of the
of the whole disregulated growth and
that's the fuels these fermentation
fuels are driving the disregulated
growth and yeah you can incinerate the
whole tissue and yes you can poison the
whole body uh with these with these
treatments you know every time I see a
baldheaded cancer patient I say that
person was treated by someone who has no
clue uh what's going on because you're
trying to eliminate cancer cells why why
should you go Bal do do the cancer cells
exist in your hair follicles no so so
baldheaded cancer patients are the uh uh
obvious uh uh signs that the field
doesn't know what cancer is I it's it's
really it's really terrible when you
think about it and um yeah and the go
and those who do metabolic therapy like
Maggie and Brad Jones who put out the
movie the cancer Revolution based on our
stuff um are collecting more and more of
these stage four cancer patients from
all different kinds of cancers and
they're still alive far longer than they
would have been expected had they done
standard of care now some of them do
standard of care with metabolic therapy
um but most of them do uh metabolic
therapy alone or or it's in combination
but but the bottom line is is that it's
working and how many tens of thousands
of of success stories do we need before
the the system changes the standard of
care or modifies it the current standard
of care for cancer should not be written
in Granite and uh physician should not
fear losing their license if they decide
to modify the standard of care so the
system has created a situation that does
not allow for alternative approaches um
we also must be careful about um uh uh
people claiming that they do and
understand metabolic therapy and then
don't do it in or do it in the wrong way
or push nonsensical uh things that have
no relevance we are writing the standard
of care for metabolic therapy right now
with my physician colleagues and once we
can publish that that'll be the
guidelines by which we can manage most
of these cancers um uh very effectively
without without the collateral damage
that we're that we're seeing now so it's
just a matter of time it'll change the
whole system is going to it's in the
process now slowly changing but you have
to deal with an entrenched system uh
that is uh both at the in industrial
it's at the academic level research
Grants awarded to all these scientists
at medical schools uh studying mutations
in cancer the pharmaceutical industries
that are making massive amounts of money
on these on these drugs and also the
hospital systems that generate the
revenue it's an
entire um U academic pharmaceutical
industrial complex that's standing in
the way of transitioning away from what
we're doing to this new uh approach to
deal with cancer as a metabolic disorder
so you see all the problems that oh
absolutely see in the nutrition Fields
like when you see what you're up against
sometimes and you go into a grocery
store it's so disheartening but you're
like nope you just got to keep keep
moving on and and keep yeah well it's a
it's a challenge it's a struggle and and
the other thing that people need should
know and I think um we've you know we
have organizations for breast cancer
colon cancer lung cancer and they all
make it seem like they're all different
we should raise money for breast cancer
colon cancer brain cancer and all this
these are all very similar the tribes
need to unite uh there is can cancer is
a singular disorder of energy metabolism
it it just looks a little different if
it's in the brain the lung the bladder
the colon the breast but it's all all
the cells are are doing the same thing
they're all fermenting so it's a simple
that's what I call it a very simple
disease driven by fermentation
metabolism which is to uh radical for
people to accept uh even though the
science is Rock Solid to support what
I'm saying um they there're there it's
just too simple I can't it can't be that
it can't be that simple let's put it
that way that was my exact thought like
it's just way too simple for them to
acknowledge okay you want to see okay
then do a water only fast with some
endol follow our press pulse therapy and
you'll see how powerful it is and then
you'll realize how it's not that
complicated you know if you want to get
down into the into the minutia of the
the signaling Cascades that are going on
inside these cells I mean you can make a
simple situation massively complicated
but you know our goal is you know just
kill tumor cells without toxicity yeah
as it should be well let's talk about
the accessibility and the afford
affordability of the metabolic Solutions
and the the metabolic approach obviously
the nutrition part anybody can do you
have to have buyin from the patient
which is really tough it's like they
have to be all in um but if somebody
wanted to do like the Press pulse where
would they even go you said that only a
few people are doing it and um not
everyone is doing it correctly like well
people now like what what can they do
yeah well that's the whole thing and
this is the the
great blowback that I get all from all
these YouTubes this guy talks the talk
but where do we go that's your that's
your problem I've given you I've given
you the road map I've given you the the
light it's your job to go out and make
these changes you know there's what I'm
not going to go I'm not a physici I'm
not going to go out and set up a hundred
clinics to do metabolic therapy the
system the government the the industry
should be doing that I mean we've
changed we've told people what they need
to do to get this uh uh put the train
back on the track you know then you say
well I there's no clinics well go go to
your damn Congressman tell them we want
clinics for metabolic therapy for crying
out loud you know I mean this is a
people thing you want to live you better
start thinking about this you know March
on Washington for crying out loud I mean
or rally the tribe all these different
cancer groups should all get together as
a single cancer organization and say we
want metabolic therapy we're tired of
toxic drugs killing us causing not only
physical toxicity but Financial toxicity
so many families are going broke uh
their marriages are falling apart people
are committing suicide on occasions
because they have no money their whole
financial system has been destroyed by
paying for drugs that don't work I mean
this is tragedy in every level it's just
a tragedy so unless it's not going to
change at all the guys at the top
medical schools are not going to change
their plan until the people demand it so
uh um and what I'm saying yes people can
put this the burden of this on you
people
can do a lot of this but if I even I
were to get cancer I would talk to my
friends um about it you like to talk to
somebody and know you're on the right
path we developed the glucose Ketone
index calculator to allow people to know
when they get into the the what we call
the zone of nutritional therapeutic
ketosis and that's a first step and
that's going to be require the patient
has to be a participant in their own
health care so it's not just you know
relying on some
physician the patient has to work with
the oncologist together as a team yeah
to work what's your gki once your GK
glucose Ketone index is low and that and
they say what do you have to eat to do
that I don't know everybody's different
you can eat a a Mediterranean diet you
could eat a ketogenic diet you could eat
a pescatarian diet a vegan diet whatever
you can bring to bring your gki down and
I I know that people who don't have
cancer can bring these zones down much
easier than people with cancer so
clearly uh having the dis and that's
because of the emotional stress
sometimes that's due to the treatments
they're given raising blood sugar makes
it extremely difficult to get down into
the Zone if you're being treated uh with
drugs that actually prevent you from
getting into the zone so um so again the
patient has to Bear considerable
responsibility but what they need to do
is they have a meter you can look at the
numbers push the button it tell you
exactly how far you are from the the
nutritional Zone uh people tell me oh
you know I've done this diet I've done I
can't get into the zone
and and and it can be hard um but all I
know is that if water I hate water only
fasting it's tough to do but in our in
our press pulse uh if you go uh low or
zero carb diet for 10 or 15 days your
body slowly adjusts to this new reality
you can make sugar from within the body
but it's very low but it's necessary uh
but once you get in then you can water
step walk into a water only fast and
then you hit them with the glutamine
targeting drugs and then then so the
body is so primed to to to and the tumor
cells are so susceptible now to even
minute doses of some of these drugs so
they'll up and die quick because they're
already on the threshold of death and
you've now just you can push them over
the edge much easier once your body is
into this new Zone and um for
oncologists to tell you what what you
were told is just
absolutely incorrect incorrect
information um so you have to realize so
this is the now the P cancer patient has
no they're almost as clueless as the
physician that's treating them and as a
matter of fact now we're starting to see
many of the patients know better what
should be done than the than the
oncologists treating them so I mean this
is this is absolutely true yeah you know
so because they're listening but you see
there's a lot of
misinformation everything that I'm
saying I have written and
so if people want to get into more of
the nitty-gritty of what I'm saying just
put my name into Google and ask to see
my
Publications okay so I can't go into all
the minutia of what I'm telling you but
I have it in those papers the you want
to read the Press read the Press pulse
paper that we published okay read these
papers you know oh he didn't say this he
didn't say that well read the damn
papers and then you get the information
oh I can't read the well then have
somebody interpret it for you the issue
is if people want to stay alive they
better start thinking about this um
because the other rout uh may not be uh
the outcome may not be uh what they
think yeah I know and so my mom's
through her chemo rounds but now they're
going to some pills that and I don't
even know what they are but she was all
worried like you said like the the
stress and the emotional part of it is
huge too and and how you know friends
and family are also you know kind of
pulled into the situation but those
pills um she's on Medicare of course but
her co-pay for the pills was
$3500 a month the cay I was like what
how would any and there's no way she was
affording you know they were affording
that they're
retired and so of course there was some
forms that they had to sign and some
loopholes to jump through and then it
got approved but it's like well who's
paying for that ultimately we know who's
paying for that it's everybody you know
P to the system so it is just such a
racket oh I know it is and uh but it's
unfortunate you know um it doesn't have
to be that way and uh you know it
doesn't have to be that way and this is
what I'm talking about the financial
toxicity and you know some folks have no
no insurance and it's it's devastating
and then they'll tell you oh if you
don't take these pills you're going to
die um and uh they they they use Scare
Tactics but not all of them I don't want
to say because I have a lot of good
friends that are oncologists and they
and they you know their their attitude
is the best of what is the best for the
patient but they they wish they had been
trained in medical school uh uh to know
about this and um and then a lot of them
become defensive when you approach them
the the key that every cancer patient
should ask their oncologist number one
how is the treatment you are giving me
going to restrict the availability of
glucose and glutamine to my tumor the
only two fuels that we know that can uh
that the tumor needs to to grow okay
just ask them what how is it and if they
look like a deer in the headlight you
you'll know that this guy is clueless he
has no clue now of course he can give
you radiation and toxic poisons that
will kill cancer cells but but of course
you're going to pay a serious physical
and price for this and may even kill you
so um you have to be aware of that and
that's why they always say is the
treatment Curative or pallative those
terms are extremely important because if
it's pallative they're only giving you
stuff to keep you alive a little bit
longer Curative is is different we're
trying to cure your cancer whether it
was successful or not we don't know but
pallative means we're never going to
cure it you're just on the we're just
pushing you alive a little longer if we
can do in a miserable state of existence
so so people need to know the
terminologies that are used uh uh when
they go when they go into deal with
these these situations and a lot of
people are just saying no thanks I'm
going somewhere else yeah yeah go to
Maggie and Brad Jones they're collecting
yes I have them on my list to interview
as well um going back to the glucose
part of it because that's that's just
the stuff like I love the nutrition part
of it and um helping people in that way
but we obviously need a certain level of
glucose for survival I mean you check
your glucose at any even if it's really
low probably in the 50s or 60s and
people are probably wondering well if
I'm not if I'm bringing my nutrition you
know I'm getting into nutritional
ketosis we're obviously using Ketone
bodies from fatty acid oxidation for our
fuel rather than than glucose and I just
want people to like understand like most
cancers or correct me if I'm wrong but
all cancers maybe or most of them cannot
use Ketone bodies for fuel which is why
we're we're getting them into
nutritional ketosis but the rest of the
body the vast majority of the rest of
our cells can in fact utilize Ketone
bodies and utilize them very well but
people might be confused about well if I
always have glucose in my bloodstream in
order to stay alive like why isn't the
cancer utilizing that glucose and from
what I understand it's like the body
just kind of downregulates any cell
systems that aren't
necessary um and and then you can Target
the the cancer cells more directly am I
understanding that correctly yeah yeah
you're coming close to this it's you're
very close
it's not just Ketone bodies it's also
fatty acids and I get so many uh
comments to say oh breast cancer can use
fatty no it can't uh how do I know
because I did the experiments myself so
what we do is we take cancer cells and
we take everything away from them uh
grow them in salt solution saline and uh
they die um they there's no food when
there's no fuel they die then we add
things back and see what what keeps them
alive and we add all these different
amino acids and different things back
only glucose and glutamine so if you
take cancer cells and remove glucose and
glutamine and give them Ketone bodies or
fatty acids they die they can't use
Ketone bodies or fatty acids okay now
fatty acids can sometimes if you give
them fatty acids it uncouples the
mitochondria making them use more
glucose and glutamine so if you have a
lot of glucose and glutamine in the
environment and you give fatty acids
they could make them use more glucose
and glutamine so if you keep glucose and
glutamine low fatty acids can or Ketone
bodies cannot do that now the other
issue is when you start to lower blood
sugar your body makes Ketone bodies
which can replace glucose as a fuel so
uh the brain is the biggest consumer of
sugar in our body the brain okay but the
brain can transition away from sugar to
Ketone bodies so we can start to lower
and the best example of this was the
work of drenic you want to know how low
you can get your blood sugar your body
doesn't need sugar it can transition
away to ketones or fatty fatty acids
normal cells normal cells can burn fatty
acids or Ketone heart burns fatty acids
okay heart can burn Ketone brain Burns
ketones all the cells in our body except
the rytes which just require a minim
minimal amount of glucose so you can
bring blood sugar levels down really low
what Gren drenic did is he took uh U 30
obese really obese men and fasted them
for uh 21 days
uh and then shot him up with insulin and
U brought the blood sugars down to 9
milligrams per decaler 0.5 Millar which
is just barely you can't find it and
most clinicians said oh this guy should
be completely dead they were what
completely cognitive fine there was no
abnormality in these guys because their
body had completely shifted to ketones
and fatty acids they didn't need any
glucose so um when you're when you start
lowering ing blood sugar and elevating
ketones you can push glucose down
further and further and what happens
then there becomes a new competition for
the available glucose on the part of all
of your normal cells they're burning
ketones but they'll take in that glucose
the cancer cell absolutely has to have
that glucose and it takes it in very
inefficiently so when the rest of the
body is now competing for the first time
when the body has a lot of sugar the
body doesn't turn doesn't look at the
Cancer cell as a problem because the
rest of the body has enough fuel when
you start lowering the level all of a
sudden the normal cells are switching to
ketones and these tumor cells can't make
the switch so they're at a total
competitive disadvantage this is why
it's a whole systems physiology to kill
the tumor cells yeah so um and it works
it's it's evolutionarily conserved in
our physiology we evolved as a starve
species on this planet we we could go
for long per periods of time without
eating with the minimal amounts of
nutrition we're omnivorous meaning that
we can eat anything that crawls walks or
flies on this planet we can eat to stay
alive our bodies are perfectly Geared
for operation under massive nutritional
stress tumor cells can't once you put
them into that category they are sitting
ducks for the rest of the body turns on
them and eats them so but you got to get
below a threshold that threshold comes
down and your rest of the cells get
super healthy you start to have
cognitive uh actually more cognitively
equipped you feel better you feel
stronger and these tumor cells are
getting hammered now this is what I just
told you is the solution to the cancer
problem um and but you have to realize
that folks are going to have to know
their physiology they're gonna have to
have some level of scientific literacy
this is what I teach in my classes here
at Boston College scientific literacy um
you need to know something about how
your body works you need to know about
some of these things and you know people
say what about prevention and and I said
people in our country and most people
don't care about prevent now I'm saying
all most people because we have an
obesity epidemic obesity has replaced
smoking as one of the number one risk
factors for cancer so you think of
people really concerned about cancer you
wouldn't have you'd have a very minimal
level of obese people the fact that we
have a obesity epidemic means people
don't care about cancer prevention
period not that
complicated yeah yeah because I was
going to ask you what you thought would
be the single most
pressing thing to do to focus on to
avoid
cancer in the future but really it's the
whole metabolic Health the metabolic
health of the person and that's all we
talk about on this podcast so it's just
it's a compilation of all the things but
I'm curious I'm curious as um you talk
about and then we'll wrap up here um you
know the body or the cancer cells using
glucose and glutamine for their feling
source and fermentation are there
certain cancers that use like primarily
glucose or certain cancers that use
primarily glutamine because I'm just
thinking back like how you said that um
you know the early researchers of cancer
and the metabolic disease they knew
about the glucose but they were missing
the glutamine part of it and certain
people can fast a certain amount of time
and the cancer seems to disintegrate or
they go on a ketogenic diet and it seems
to disintegrate so are they all kind of
using glutamine and glucose at the same
rate or there certain cancers or is it
just dependent on the person yeah well
all of what you just said but we we've
come to realize that the metastatic
cancer cell which is the one that
spreads through your body the one that
that ultimately um is the most
challenging alling is part of our immune
system uh it is our immune system gone
corrupted um and it is usually a
maccrage or some sort of um um one of
these kinds of immune cells that already
have the capacity to do this they're
heavily glutamine dependent so um uh
they they seem to be more glutamine uh
dependent than glucose dependent whereas
the rapidly growing stem cells uh this
is another kind of cancer cell they they
seem to be a little bit more glucose
depend then glutamine dependent so uh
the answer to your question is it
depends on the two types of cancer cells
whether they're a stem rapidly growing
cancer stem cell or a metastatic um cell
they're all corrupted metabolically it's
just that some some are more glucose
dependent than glutamine this is why
this is why we don't care uh we just
assume uh we don't care because they're
all dependent one way or another on
glucose and glutamine and so we just we
have to take take the the two out
together uh and there's there's then
there's no op you've closed the front
door and the back door of the barn and
now they're trapped and and and you just
raise the ketones and you burn the barn
down on top of them so so um uh but you
you can't just hit glucose now what is
interesting though is if you do
long-term water only fasting with
exercise you're actually lowering
glucose glucose and glutamine
simultaneously and that was always a
phenomenon to me because I didn't know
how people could get their cancers
resolved
by these very long-term fasts and I'm
saying we're not targeting the glutamine
with any drug or anything and yet the
tumor cells are are dissolved and and
that because you're going below these
these thresholds and you're just putting
so much pressure you're allowing the
body to go after the tumor cells for f
for fuel but you don't do that until you
go on these water long-term water only
fasts um but you can run those people I
don't I don't want I'm not proposing
that that to do this is everybody should
be doing this because the Press pulse
strategy allows us to achieve the same
goal with making a little bit easier for
folks to do all this stuff yeah so uh
again it's a all this is a work in
progress yeah and the excitement of the
field is going to know how many
different ways we can kill s cancer
cells without toxicity um uh while
enhancing health and not going
financially broke doing all this right
right yeah you know you're talking about
the the long-term fasting
as a strategy the water only fasting and
I'm sure it's very dependent on the type
of cancer the person where they are
metabolically so many different factors
but are we talking like three-day fasts
in a specific time period are we talking
five days seven days or is it just you
know we follow the we follow the glucose
Ketone index uh whatever the gki values
are so people know when you're in 2.0 or
below uh you're really having low
glucose elevated ketones so that stage
in itself is uh putting a lot of
pressure on the tumor cells how long you
could go in that stage and we're
collecting data now uh from people all
over the world on on how their GK are
going with these things and again you
have to be recognize that there the the
healthy patient and the not so healthy
patient that that's under these kinds of
conditions so the data we're we're
collecting data and and Pablo Kelly the
brain cancer survivor who you who used
no chemo no radiation you know he we had
five years of glucose Ketone index data
on this on this fellow and he was ACC
hit a little log book and he was every
day recording his blood sugar sometime
and ketones sometimes two times a day
and um we put it all together in the big
paper so people can go and they go look
and they go five years this guy five
years but those most of those people are
dead within within two years with those
kinds of tumors and he's now entering
his 10th year of survival yeah
so uh you can do it people love to
record numbers they get all excited when
they see their oh look at my glucose
today and I follow Pablo's story it's
it's it's trly remarkable and amazing
well as we close out here one last
question and that's um the prevention of
recurrence if somebody does undergo the
metabolic you know
medic what you're proposing we do the
diet we do the pulse press um or you
know if that's not available do do some
at least the the diet part so prevent
the recurrence once somebody gets the
cancer under control and manage and and
maybe even like in Pablo's case you're
kind of just living with it but it's not
advancing are we talking about staying
in that level of Nutri well that's a
personal decision okay that's a personal
decision you you know what you need to
do uh we've had people fall off the W
soal fall off the wagon go back and
eating the big you know yep
I that pizza you know the the the issue
is is that we have seen tumors grow
faster um when people start elevating
their blood Su if they're not completely
resolved and the cancer is there and
you're kind of keeping it at at Bay
you're not allowing it to get too
aggressive H and I don't know I mean we
haven't been doing this long enough to
know how long people can live uh doing
metabolic therapy so um the answer is we
don't have enough we have long-term
survivors but we don't have them that
long to know you know uh certainly
beyond their predicted survival for sure
but not to know that hey this guy had
brain cancer and he died at 98 years old
from a heart attack you know we cured a
dog we cured one dog that's all I can
say I have published that too on mass
cell tumor of the dog um it's a very
interesting story also open accent
anybody with dogs are loaded with cancer
too and they're they're they're eating
the same crap that we
eat and they they're they have the T but
you can go back and look at what that
woman did on metabolic therapy for her
dog who died at 15 years of age from
heart failure uh but the cancer never
returned so so we have a lot of things
out there but so far we haven't had
anyone totally cured I don't know want
to say want to say the word cure who has
who had cancer like young like you and
then live to be like 99 years old or 100
uh just dying from old age and the
cancer never returned so I would call
that we won't know that until until you
end your life and say oh I and the
cancer never came back and you say oh
that then you definitely were cured but
we don't know we can't know that yeah
and it's the same like I work with tons
of diabetics and those with fatty liver
it's like I'm very careful to say I'm
not going to cure your diabetes we're
going to put it in remission we're going
to take all the symptom away going to
get you metabolically healthy and your
lab values normalized but it is a
slippery slope to say like cure oh yeah
we don't like I don't like to use the
term cure I like to use the term
management yeah we could manage the
cancer but how if we ever cure it or not
I don't know so I don't want people to
say oh ca fre says you can cure cancer
no I don't right I didn't say you didn't
hear me say that I I I said we might
have we going to have a better chance to
manage the cancer without toxicity
whether you get cured or not we know
until you die from old age from
something else yes this has been such a
packed hour um and it just so important
so say somebody gets newly diagnosed we
know some I mean everybody knows
somebody with cancer unfortunately or
they will if they haven't yet somebody
gets newly diagnosed um tell us where we
can find your work and then um I did
want to ask you like if they could go to
like the flccc website as as a resource
to
look for some of the Alternatives if if
the approaches that we talked about
today aren't available to them yeah well
I think you'd have to look on the web
and look at my papers and talk about
whether your phys I think that your
general practitioner what the primary
care physician a primary care physician
can walk a lot of these people through
the whole process so you don't need an
oncologist um all the time for sure but
a lot of primary care because they're in
the business of trying to keep you
healthy they're the ones doing the blood
work they're the ones knowing whether
you're in a healthy zone or not so the
primary care physician becomes the the
the
facilitator of doing this and the um you
know the the we keep going because of
most of the research that we have that
we're doing is supported by private
foundations and
philanthropy so um I keep we keep doing
the research to improve the overall uh
outcome uh strategies and as long as we
we we can do that the field will move
forward rapidly um so uh people should
know that they can support Travis
christopherson's foundation for
metabolic therapy he wants to change the
terminology to call it um metabolic
oncology so there's a new kind of a term
coming so patients can go to their uh
hospitals and say uh I I'd like to have
metabolic oncology do you have a
metabolic oncologist the answer
invariably will be know yeah but but at
least you at least you're putting the
word out there let people know hey this
is the hot thing metabolic oncology and
um and and we're the ones that are you
know trailblazing on this on this whole
thing to improve and make it better um
uh so the more we the more we can test
all these different diet drug cocktails
and these other conditions the better
off most people with cancer uh will
eventually be yeah and I like the
thought about about asking the PCP and
bringing them in you know getting them
involved because that's exactly what I
told my mom I'm like there's all of
these would you say the PCP what's it
what's it just bringing them into the
care if if the oncologist isn't willing
to look at some different
strategies um but because I know my
mom's PCP is much more open-minded and
willing to look at research than yeah
they're the ones they're the ones but
they sometimes can be a little reluctant
because they feel they're stepping on
the toes of the UN yeah I know it's it's
just a so you have to be a little care
you have to be a little careful about
that but you can word it in such a way
that you'll allow them to do what
they're supposed to be doing um and uh
and working it that way because the
cancer patient can ask the same
questions to their Primary Care as they
could to the oncologist but they got to
make sure that they they know the
boundaries of of of of their area yeah
so I mean to tell a can tell a cancer
patient you might want to uh get into
nutritional ketosis to help you out um
but then again the oncologists say no no
don't ever do that drink the infam have
drink the Ure Instead at least you're
getting some nutrition and know and like
we were talking like my mom had fatty
liver for decades and she was overweight
and they're so worried about her lo I'm
like Mom if you lose some fat from what
we're trying to accomplish here like
you're going to be healthier than you
were before yeah it's it's it's it's
nuts so I'm I'm so thankful for your
work and all of the Publications that
you're doing and and those who you're
educating I mean we have a long way to
go but but we come you've helped bring
you know things evolve and and bring
them forward so we are yeah than very
thankful for you and your work and and I
hope you continue to do it for a long
time
I'm gonna do it until I The Last Breath
of my
body perfect I love to hear that well
thanks so much for all your knowledge
and all you're doing and um for sharing
your knowledge with us oh thanks Shannon
nice to be
here